---
title: Why travel bans are so addictive
header:
  teaser:
  image:
  image_description:
  caption:
---

These days I often hear things like "come on, you should give up now, get a job somewhere else! Why do you want to go to such a country? But maybe it is your dream to go to Japan. That's why you've been so patient, right?" But the truth is more complicated. I doubt anyone stuck with the [Japan travel ban](/research-is-not-tourism-the-long-wait-for-japan/) was ready for such a long wait. The truth, I believe, is that many of us have become addicted to it.

## Checking news is the new smoking

Growing up in the nineties, *addiction* is a word I was taught to associate with dangerous drugs, and the image of some desperate bearded men with filthy hair. Tobacco, cannabis, alcohol perhaps, except for your daily glass of Bordeaux, these were the kind of things that cause addiction. Physical dependence was a real danger, psychological dependence merely a debated side-effect.

A few years later though, as a student in Paris, I was addicted to playing *la coinche*, a four-players cards game, highly popular in my previous school. I knew I was addicted, because I had read Wikipedia's academic definition of [addiction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Addiction) and checked nearly all the boxes. I played with classmates late in the evenings. We played especially late on days before exams, especially when none of us was prepared, and especially when we were all already sleep-deprived. The Wikipedia page was scary, but I had managed to turn three good friends in total addicts just like me, so it was all good fun. Except for the sleeping-in-class, and for the exams.

Fast-forward to the 21st century, we now live in an age when addiction is ubiquitous and rarely a drug thing. In fact, addiction has become so casual that it is a business model for the world's most successful tech companies. "Because", as Bill Mayer said to a camera in May 2017: "let's face it, checking your 'likes' is the new smoking" (quote from *Digital Minimalism* by [Cal Newport](https://www.calnewport.com/)). Well, for those [waiting for months]() to restart their studies, research, work, relationships and family lives in Japan, chances are that "let's face it, checking news from Japan is the new smoking".

## We're all trapped in a giant pachinko

Over the last few months, my relationship with the news, and especially news about Japan's politics, has gone from largely unconcerned to compulsively addicted. Even before covid, I knew of a few friends and colleagues addicted to the news, but this was something I could not really understand. Why would one spend hours on checking the news, when there are so many more fun things to do? I mean, it's all pretty much bad news anyway, right? Asking a news addict why he'd not quit, is the same as asking a smoker why she'd purposely destroy her lungs. It is just missing the point. But checking the news is not quite like smoking. In some ways, I would like to argue that it is even worse.

Luckily, travel bans are much safer for our lungs than smoking. But I think they can truly mess up our brains. When you smoke, you get a fix. But when you check the news from Japan, you never know what you get. It's a gamble.

In the 19xxs, [Burrhus Frederic Skinner](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B._F._Skinner), an American behaviour psychologist, did a set of interesting experiments on pigeons. Skinner showed that pigeons could be quickly learned a habit to press a button to be rewarded with food. Press a button, get a pellet. This pattern is called *continuous reinforcement*, and it is a really good way to learn habits. In another experiment though, Skinner replaced the systematic reward with a random, variable reward. The big surprise was that such *variable reinforcement* was even more efficient than continuous reinforcement. In fact, some pigeons even went berserk and continued to press the button hundreds or thousands of times in hope for a reward. Yes, that's me reading the news.

A lesser known and not-so-glorious aspect of Japanese culture is the *pachinko*. When I lived in Japan in 2018 and 2019, I did a bit of bicycle touring. When cycling into a small country town, I typically found a non-branded convenience store, public baths, a small restaurant, and then hidden on the outskirt, a love hotel with a nonsensical French name, and an equally shabby-looking building which says "*pachinko*". Pachinkos are like casinos in Europe, except that they are many more of them, and they inspire misery more than luxury.

Sometimes I took my bike early in the morning, and while most activity in Japan begins quite late in the day, I was surprised to observe long lines of middle-aged men waiting to enter pachinko. I think their faces looked very much the same as my face when I check the news every morning these days.

To those who have been waiting for months to restart their work and lives in Japan, checking the news is like going to the *pachinko* and playing the slot-machine. With the uncertainty of the pandemic, and added uncertainty of the volatile political response, it is almost impossible to predict what you get when opening the news. It does not cost much to spend an hour in the pachinko, but it is well known that if it becomes a habit, gambling can ruin your wallet. Precisely because it is addictive. I think there are two differences between pachinkos and Japan's travel ban. The first is that pachinkos are designed precisely to ruin your wallet, which I hope is not the purpose of the travel ban. The second difference is that in our case, it is not only money that we gamble. It is our social life, our work, our homes and meaning. As the Okinawans put it so well, our [ikigai](https://www.bluezones.com/exploration/okinawa-japan/)

## A tentative word of advice

Thanks to initiatives from [Rossi-san](https://www.youtube.com/c/RossiSan/) and [many others](https://twitter.com/hashtag/JapanTravelBan), there is a sense of community growing around people affected by Japan's travel ban. Because everyone's situation is different, it is difficult to give some kind of generic advice. But if you are reading this and share this feeling of "addiction", let me share what helped a bit in my case.

Last month, I could get a visa. We booked the flight, the two-weeks quarantine. I passed the PCR test. For a few days or weeks, I truly believed that I was going to Japan and back to work. Then on the day before my flight, we cancelled everything, and excitement turned to anger. In the following days, we had all kind of shocking news from Japan. More anger. But in the end I am grateful for that excitement, and I am grateful for that anger, for these feelings lifted me up above the nebulous cloud of languish that had fogged my horizon for months before these events. Instead of waiting for the border to perhaps reopen at the end of the month, I used that short burst of energy to prepare a plan B.

My plan B is to do remote work for the university that wants to hire me. It is not a satisfactory solution for anyone involved. The pay is poor (weak yen not helping), I'll need to setup my own company and sell a product, which is really not how research works, my employers are probably dealing with crazy paperwork again. To make things more complicated and embarrassing, my future boss is on a long-awaited and stressful fieldwork in Antarctica and only reachable by sat phone... But I am not exactly ready to give up, I do not have better offers yet, and most urgently I need something to keep me off the news. So it is a temporary solution, but it does feel like a good temporary solution. My employers and I are working on it, and it is looking good.

Again, I realise that everyone's situation is different. For some, a plan B will be a kind of temporary compromise or remote work like me. For others, it will be a plan to live outside Japan. For others yet, it may be a kind of new activity that does not depend on the borders status. At this moment, there are a lot of reasons to be angry with Japan's politics. Often, anger is egocentric and unjustified. But sometimes, it is correct and important to be angry. I think this is one of these times. Please make a good use of that anger energy to prepare your own plan B.